Configuration proposal (#225)
open-telemetry/oteps: text/0225-configuration.md

The working group proposes the use of [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) as the language to define the schema. It provides:

* support for client-side validation
* code generation
* broad support across languages

In order to provide a minimal API surface area, implementations *MUST* support the following methods.

### Configure(config)

An API called `Configure` receives a configuration object. This method then applies the configuration object's details to the SDK. This method specifically applies the configuration object to allow for multiple configuration format providers to be supported in the future. This OTEP describes two such providers in a file and data structure formats below, but remote file formats *MAY* be implemented in the future.

### ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filepath, format) -> config

> An API called `ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile` receives a string parameter indicating the file path containing the configuration to be parsed. An optional format parameter may be provided to indicate the format that this configuration uses. YAML *SHOULD* be supported, but JSON, which is a strict subset of YAML, *MAY* be supported if a language ecosystem has good reason. For example a language that has built-in support for JSON running in an environment that is sensitive to additional dependencies *MAY* only be able to support JSON configuration.

Reviewer: I've spent quite a bit of time thinking about this paragraph. I'm not sure if it needs to be changed or not, but I'll write my thoughts here and we'll see what the authors think.

"Sensitive to additional dependencies" seems to refer to JS or even more specifically web JS. I'm not sure file-based configuration as it is specified here (loaded from a file path) makes sense in the web context. It might make sense to distinguish between implementations which ship their own dependencies (most compiled languages) and environments which don't (most dynamic languages). Taking NodeJS as an example, most users are not overly sensitive to dependencies, in fact many are unfortunately desensitized in this area, but they introduce complications that many people don't think about. As JS maintainer I want to limit or eliminate dependencies whenever possible for more reasons than just deployment size.

JS has built-in support for JSON, Ruby has standard library support for both YAML (as of version 2) and JSON (as of version 3), and Python has standard library support for JSON. I think it makes sense to write this in such a way that it encourages whatever format can be used without any external dependencies, preferring YAML if the state of support is equal for both.

Maybe something along these lines?

```suggestion
An API called `ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile` receives a string parameter indicating the file path containing the configuration to be parsed. An optional format parameter may be provided to indicate the format that this configuration uses. At least one of JSON or YAML MUST be supported. If either format can be supported without additional dependencies, that format SHOULD be preferred. If neither or both formats are supported, YAML should be the preferred choice.
```

Reviewer 2: The question of the format stems from poor composition. I see several layers here:
  * some sort of a factory mechanism that takes a "configuration" and produces SDK components
  * a "configuration" data model. Agnostic to how it is instantiated.
  * a configuration parser, for a certain format / representation.

```
cfg = ConfigYAMLParser.parse(File.load(filename))
factory = SDKFactory.fromCfg(cfg)
tracerProvider = factory.tracerProvider()
```
This is visually more complicated, but cleanly decomposed by responsibilities. I wouldn't prefer `ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile` over above.

Reviewer 3: > I think it makes sense to write this in such a way that it encourages whatever format can be used without any external dependencies, preferring YAML if the state of support is equal for both.

The downside of not having a stronger preference for one format is that it forces users to have to be aware of the format preference of their language. If all otel languages support YAML, users can more easily use standard config across all languages in use by their organization.

Reviewer: Is there any feature of YAML that we're specifically using aside from a preference for not using curly braces? If there is a desire to use a single configuration across all services, JSON is actually valid YAML so I would argue that would be a better choice. A valid JSON file can be used with OTel services which support either format. Introducing spec-required external dependencies is something I think we should consider very carefully before moving forward.

Reviewer: > The question of the format stems from poor composition. I see several layers here:
> 
> * some sort of a factory mechanism that takes a "configuration" and produces SDK components
> * a "configuration" data model. Agnostic to how it is instantiated.
> * a configuration parser, for a certain format / representation.
> 
> ```
> cfg = ConfigYAMLParser.parse(File.load(filename))
> factory = SDKFactory.fromCfg(cfg)
> tracerProvider = factory.tracerProvider()
> ```
> 
> This is visually more complicated, but cleanly decomposed by responsibilities. I wouldn't prefer `ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile` over above.

I think the motivation for `ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile` which mixes many concerns is to support the `OTEL_CONFIG_FILE` variable. Not arguing for that function, just seems like that was the motivation.

Author: > Is there any feature of YAML that we're specifically using aside from a preference for not using curly braces? If there is a desire to use a single configuration across all services, JSON is actually valid YAML so I would argue that would be a better choice.

In my opinion, the reasons for YAML over JSON are:

* YAML is already used for configuring the collector
* support for comments
* more human readable than JSON

Reviewer: I wasn't questioning the choice to prefer YAML. Just pointing out that if a user has multiple services and one of them only supports JSON, they can still use a single config file for both because all valid JSON is valid YAML.

Reviewer 3: Also, YAML supports anchors, which allow reusing bits of config.

In addition to the lack of curly braces, YAML also removes the need for double quotes. Generally, I think YAML is easier for humans to write than JSON.

Reviewer: > In my opinion, the reasons for YAML over JSON are:
> 
> * YAML is already used for configuring the collector

Since the config between collector and SDKs is unlikely to be shared, I think this advantage is quite minor

> * support for comments

Comments are nice I agree.

> * more human readable than JSON

IMO this really only applies to badly-formatted JSON

Reviewer: > Generally, I think YAML is easier for humans to write than JSON.

Maybe its my JS background but I strongly disagree. Users not already familiar with YAML have deal with data type ambiguity, significant whitespace, multiple list syntaxes, weird syntax with nested list/objects, etc.

In any case, I'm not arguing for JSON over YAML. I'm arguing for reduction of external dependencies and conformance with the existing ecosystems, which may entail choosing JSON in some languages.

Reviewer: One possible solution is to allow users to optionally install pluggable parsers. For example in JS we could use JSON by default, but parse additional filetypes if their parser exists:

```sh
$ OTEL_CONFIG_FILE=./otel.yaml npm start
Error: no parser found for configuration file with extension 'yaml'
       Use a supported file type or install a parser for this file type

$ npm install @opentelemetry/config-parser-yaml
success

$ OTEL_CONFIG_FILE=./otel.yaml npm start
process starting
```

Reviewer: This also opens the door to additional file types in the future (another very common idiom in JS is to actually use `.js` files instead of `.json` files for configuration.

Reviewer: @jack-berg I saw you thumbed up my message but i'm not sure if you're saying that would be allowable by the current wording, or if you think it would be a desirable outcome in general. I'm hoping for the second one. Maybe you'd be happier with something like this:

```suggestion
An API called `ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile` receives a string parameter indicating the file path containing the configuration to be parsed. An optional format parameter may be provided to indicate the format that this configuration uses. At least one of JSON or YAML MUST be supported. If either format can be supported without additional dependencies, that format SHOULD be preferred. If neither or both formats are supported, YAML should be the preferred choice. If YAML is not supported due to dependency concerns, there SHOULD be a way for a user to explicitly enable it by installing their own dependency.
```

Reviewer 3: > or if you think it would be a desirable outcome in general. 

This. I like your wording, but would weaken "there SHOULD be a way for a user to explicitly enable it by installing their own dependency" to a "MAY". Hoping to minimize burden on maintainers and promote standardization where possible. If a language community gets enough feedback that the defaults are insufficient, let them opt into adding this extension capability.

Reviewer: Adding suggestion with MAY wording for quick application if @codeboten agrees

```suggestion
An API called `ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile` receives a string parameter indicating the file path containing the configuration to be parsed. An optional format parameter may be provided to indicate the format that this configuration uses. At least one of JSON or YAML MUST be supported. If either format can be supported without additional dependencies, that format SHOULD be preferred. If neither or both formats are supported, YAML should be the preferred choice. If YAML is not supported due to dependency concerns, there MAY be a way for a user to explicitly enable it by installing their own dependency.
```

Author: Thanks @dyladan, this works for me

The method returns a `Configuration` model that has been validated. This API *MAY* return an error or raise an exception, whichever is idiomatic to the implementation for the following reasons:

* file doesn't exist or is invalid

> * configuration parsed is invalid

Reviewer 3: I think we can only perform structural validation, and maybe some simple semantic validation. I.e. confirm that if a span processor is configured with an exporter, that exporter key is defined.

Given that we want to be able to configure extension components and can't know everything about the validation those components may perform on configuration, its unrealistic to be able to say that the model is valid in all cases. This is true for even internal components - I don't expect the configuration parser to be able to know the set of compression algorithms that are valid for the OTLP exporter. 

Let's separate concerns and expect that components may produce errors when the configuration model is applied to them.

> * configuration parsed is invalid

Author: I agree with @jack-berg, the parse method should only validate according to the schema. Although in the case you've mentioned @dyladan, the jsonschema would be able to validate using [ranges](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference/numeric.html#range). I'm suggesting the following update to the condition listed:

```suggestion
* configuration parsed is invalid according to schema
```

#### Python ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile example

```python

filepath = "./config.yaml"

try:

>   cfg = opentelemetry.ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filename)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  cfg = opentelemetry.ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filepath)
```

except Exception as e:
  print(e)

filename = "./config.json"

try:
  cfg = opentelemetry.ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filename, format="json")
except Exception as e:
  raise e

```

#### Go ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile example

```go

filename := "./config.yaml"
cfg, err := otel.ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filename)
if err != nil {
  return err
}

filename := "./config.json"
cfg, err := otel.ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filename, otelconfig.WithFormat("json"))
if err != nil {
  return err
}

```

Implementations *MUST* allow users to specify an environment variable to set the configuration file. This gives flexibility to end users of implementations that do not support command line arguments. The proposed name for this variable:

> * `OTEL_CONFIG_FILE`

Reviewer: Should the implementation choose YAML or JSON using file extension or by inspecting the contents of the file? Or is this only meant to support whatever the default file format is?

Reviewer 3: I think if an implementation supports both they should choose the correct one based on extension. If an implementation only supports one format (i.e. JSON) and `config.yaml` is specified, that implementation should throw an error. It can produce the error either based on detecting the incorrect extension, or by trying to parse the file and waiting for things to blow up 😂.

Author: Added a note to call out that the file extension will be used to detect the format.

  # signals. Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect and the SDK
  # will remain enabled. This setting has no effect on propagators configured through
  # the OTEL_PROPAGATORS variable.
  #
  # Environment variable: OTEL_SDK_DISABLED
  disabled: false
  # Configure resource attributes and resource detection for all signals.
  resource:
    # Key-value pairs to be used as resource attributes.
    #
    # Environment variable: OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES
    attributes:
      # Sets the value of the `service.name` resource attribute
      #
      # Environment variable: OTEL_SERVICE_NAME
      service.name: !!str "unknown_service"
  # Configure context propagators. Each propagator has a name and args used to configure it. None of the propagators here have configurable options so args is not demonstrated.
  #
  # Environment variable: OTEL_PROPAGATORS
  propagators: [tracecontext, baggage]
  # Configure the tracer provider.
  tracer_provider:
    # Span exporters. Each exporter key refers to the type of the exporter. Values configure the exporter. Exporters must be associated with a span processor.

>     exporters:

Reviewer 3: The goal with this was to reduce nesting. 

Some conversations on this took place [here](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/pull/16#discussion_r1035353965), and [here](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/issues/12).

>     exporters:

Reviewer: Sorry for the slow reply. I was trying to read all the conversation about this before replying. I may be alone here but to me this seems confusing for new users not already very familiar with the limitations of the spec. I think you will find that new users will try to do things like reference the same exporter from multiple processors and will be confused when that breaks. It breaks the actual model of the OTel architecture. "reduce nesting" seems like a technical decision made for aesthetic reasons.

>     exporters:

Reviewer: If a user has a desire to reduce nesting they can also use YAML anchors

```yaml
exporters:
  - &zipkin
    zipkin:
      endpoint: http://localhost:9411/api/v2/spans
      timeout: 10000

sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporter: *otlp-trace
```

>     exporters:

Reviewer 3: It's true. I don't feel strongly about this. Interested in what you think about the [sampler config](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/blob/main/config.yaml#L178-L229) schema we've proposed. Given that samplers are often composed, we've provided:

- `sampler_config`: a map whose keys are the name / type of sampler, and whose values are the config for the sampler. Config is free to reference keys of other samplers in the map to build up higher order samplers. 
- `sampler`: refers to a key in `sampler_config` and dictates which sampler the tracer provider is configured with.

This strategy keeps the sampler configuration at a fixed depth where it might otherwise be arbitrarily deep.

The exporter / span processor strategy is similar to this.

It could be beneficial if we imagine a future where exporters are frequently composed together. This may be a popular thing to do given the lack of ability mutability for `SpanProcessor#onEnd`. No where to filter / obfuscate data except in the exporter layer.

>     exporters:

Reviewer: I have more or less the same thoughts about the sampler config. In the example you linked I'm not even sure how the Jaeger sampler fits in. It doesn't appear to be reference anywhere? If so, this is exactly the type of configuration mistake/bug that I am worried this type of configuration will cause.

I guess I understand with sampling why you may want to configure a few and compose them together but for exporters that makes a lot less sense to me. I can't think of an example of an exporter that would be composed with another that wouldn't be better solved with a span processor anyway.

      # Configure the zipkin exporter.

>       zipkin:

Reviewer 5: Yes. `zipkin` is both the type and name. The collector uses the same pattern planned here where `/` is used as a separator. You could have another `zipkin` type exporter with a name like `zipkin/2`.

          # Environment variable: OTEL_BSP_MAX_QUEUE_SIZE
          max_queue_size: 2048
          # Sets the maximum batch size.
          #
          # Environment variable: OTEL_BSP_MAX_EXPORT_BATCH_SIZE
          max_export_batch_size: 512
          # Sets the exporter. Exporter must refer to a key in sdk.tracer_provider.exporters.
          #
          # Environment variable: OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER
          exporter: zipkin
  # Configure the meter provider.
  ...
```

### Environment variable substitution

Configuration files *MUST* support environment variable expansion. While this accommodates the scenario in which a configuration file needs to reference sensitive data and is not able to be stored securely, environment variable expansion is not limited to sensitive data.

The syntax for environment variable expansion mirrors the [collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#configuration-environment-variables).

For example, given an environment where `API_KEY=1234`, the configuration file contents:

```yaml
file_format: 0.1
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: https://example.host:4317/v1/traces
        headers:

>           api-key: ${env:API_KEY}

Reviewer: I think it should be an invalid config and whatever behavior we decide for that should be followed. Personally I would argue for a thrown exception which most of the time would cause a process crash. Bad config can be tricky to notice and track down

>           api-key: ${env:API_KEY}

Reviewer 3: > I think it should be an invalid config and whatever behavior we decide for that should be followed. Personally I would argue for a thrown exception which most of the time would cause a process crash. 

I agree. 

Would be nice to see syntax that allows for a fallback / default value if not specified, like [shell parameter expansion](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Shell-Parameter-Expansion.html), but not important to solve that today.

>           api-key: ${env:API_KEY}

Reviewer 6: I also agree with @dyladan on this

>           api-key: ${env:API_KEY}

Reviewer 3: I [proposed additional language](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225/files#r1142638804) to throw / return an error if an environment variable is undefined.

The working group looked to the OpenTelemetry Collector and OpenTelemetry Operator for inspiration and guidance.

### Alternative schema languages

In choosing to recommend JSON schema, the working group looked at the following options:

* [Cue](https://cuelang.org/) - A promising simpler language to define a schema, the working group decided against CUE because:
  * Tooling available for validating CUE files in languages outside of Go were limited.
  * Familiarity and learning curve would create problems for both users and contributors of OpenTelemetry.
* [Protobuf](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers) - With protobuf already used heavily in OpenTelemetry, the format was worth investigating as an option to define the schema. The working group decided against Protobuf because:
  * Validation errors are the result of serlization errors which can be difficult to interpret.
  * Limitations in the schema definition language result in poor ergonomics if type safety is to be retained.

## Open questions

### How to handle environment variable / file config overlap?

How does file configuration interact with environment variable configuration when both are present?

> * Solution 1: Ignore environment configuration when file configuration is present. Log a warning to the user indicating that multiple configuration modes were detected, but use the file configuration as the source of truth.

Reviewer 3: I think we could log a warning when we detect this, but failing is too strong. Consider the implications if a user is operating in an environment they don't fully control (i.e. where an ops team configures environment variables by default which they extend / layer on top of).

> * Solution 1: Ignore environment configuration when file configuration is present. Log a warning to the user indicating that multiple configuration modes were detected, but use the file configuration as the source of truth.

Author: I think suggestion #1 as mentioned in this [comment](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225#discussion_r1116269308) in combination with env var substitution supports most cases.

It may be hard to differentiate when it's appropriate to log warnings. Consider the following config:

```yaml
otlp:
    endpoint: ${env:OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_TRACES_ENDPOINT}
```

Using the config file and setting `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_TRACES_ENDPOINT` would in theory result in a case that should warn, but the user just happens to be using the same env variable in their configuration. Warning here would require handling the case where some env vars listed in the specification must be known to the configuration parsing layer, or the code handling env variables must be aware of the configuration parser somehow.

> * Solution 1: Ignore environment configuration when file configuration is present. Log a warning to the user indicating that multiple configuration modes were detected, but use the file configuration as the source of truth.

Reviewer 5: Somethings can be left to the user to resolve :). If they don't want a warning printed in the case they are doing something like this it can be on them to use a different variable name.

> * Solution 1: Ignore environment configuration when file configuration is present. Log a warning to the user indicating that multiple configuration modes were detected, but use the file configuration as the source of truth.

Reviewer 5: Tho I'm of the opinion there should be no warnings and environment variables should simply override anything in the config file.

> * Solution 1: Ignore environment configuration when file configuration is present. Log a warning to the user indicating that multiple configuration modes were detected, but use the file configuration as the source of truth.

Reviewer 6: > Consider the implications if a user is operating in an environment they don't fully control (i.e. where an ops team configures environment variables by default which they extend / layer on top of).

That's a fair point, although if what we want is for people to migrate to this new configuration format I don't see this as a bad thing necessarily (I guess it depends on how costly we deem the migration to be)

> * Solution 1: Ignore environment configuration when file configuration is present. Log a warning to the user indicating that multiple configuration modes were detected, but use the file configuration as the source of truth.

Author: Captured the proposed solutions as a decision that must be made in the specification https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225/commits/19444556d823cfedd2643337f7f12633e959830e

In order to provide a minimal API surface area, implementations *MUST* support the following methods.

### Configure(config)

An API called `Configure` receives a configuration object. This method then applies the configuration object's details to the SDK. This method specifically applies the configuration object to allow for multiple configuration format providers to be supported in the future. This OTEP describes two such providers in a file and data structure formats below, but remote file formats *MAY* be implemented in the future.

### ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filepath, format) -> config

An API called `ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile` receives a string parameter indicating the file path containing the configuration to be parsed. An optional format parameter may be provided to indicate the format that this configuration uses. YAML *SHOULD* be supported, but JSON, which is a strict subset of YAML, *MAY* be supported if a language ecosystem has good reason. For example a language that has built-in support for JSON running in an environment that is sensitive to additional dependencies *MAY* only be able to support JSON configuration.

> The method returns a `Configuration` model that has been validated. This API *MAY* return an error or raise an exception, whichever is idiomatic to the implementation for the following reasons:

Reviewer: What is the intended outcome? It's not clear to me from the text. I see two obvious options

1. Process starts without telemetry
2. Process crashes

Reviewer 3: There are two cases to consider:

1. A user is calling `Configure(config)`. In this case, they can handle the exception or error in whatever way they see fit, including crashing the process or starting with some alternative fallback SDK. 
2. A user is using some sort of auto instrumentation solution like the otel java agent. Some OpenTelemetry tooling is calling `Configure(config)` and must decide how to handle error. In these cases, consider that the spec is [currently ambiguous](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/error-handling.md#basic-error-handling-principles) on whether bad user / environment config should cause the application to fail. The "MAY" implies that both failing fast and doing something else (presumably running with a noop implementation) are both acceptable. I don't think file based configuration has anything new to offer that conversation and should inherit whatever the spec says currently about failing with invalid environment variable configuration.

> The API or SDK MAY fail fast and cause the application to fail on initialization, e.g. because of a bad user config or environment, but MUST NOT cause the application to fail later at run time, e.g. due to dynamic config settings received from the Collector.

cfg, err := otel.ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filename)
if err != nil {
  return err
}

filename := "./config.json"
cfg, err := otel.ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filename, otelconfig.WithFormat("json"))
if err != nil {
  return err
}

```

Implementations *MUST* allow users to specify an environment variable to set the configuration file. This gives flexibility to end users of implementations that do not support command line arguments. The proposed name for this variable:

* `OTEL_CONFIG_FILE`

### Configuration model

To allow SDKs and instrumentation libraries to accept configuration without having to implement the parsing logic, a `Configuration` model *MAY* be provided by implementations. This object:

* has already been parsed from a file or data structure
* is structurally valid (errors may yet occur when SDK or instrumentation interprets the object)

### Configuration file

The following demonstrates an example of a configuration file format (full example [here](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/blob/main/config.yaml)):

```yaml
# include version specification in configuration files to help with parsing and schema evolution.
file_format: 0.1

> sdk:

Reviewer: Just noticed this property. Does it imply that this file will be shared with other non-sdk components?

Reviewer 3: A goal of this is to hold configuration for SDKs as well as instrumentation. However, there are some challenges with configuring instrumentation:

- Instrumentation configuration is non standard across libraries and across languages. How much common configuration is there? The answer may be little, and that we support instrumentation configuration in whatever way we support extension components (custom exporters, processors, samplers, etc). 
- How is configuration delivered to instrumentation? Some languages have centralized setup of instrumentation, but would need to accommodate situations where "library" or "native" instrumentation configured manually and sprinkled throughout the application. Maybe there's a configuration model we pass around?
- We can't guarantee that instrumentation will adhere to the configuration. For example, if we define standard options to enable/disable instrumentation libraries, users will come to expect that to work. However, we won't have any way to control native instrumentation or instrumentation written by third parties. Giving the impression that centralized configuration of instrumentation through a file is possible may cause more problems than it solves.

Reviewer: so the `sdk` key is used in order to allow space for additional keys in the future for instrumentation, but those are out of scope for now

Reviewer 3: Correct.

It could end up being the case that we want to have the SDK keys (`tracer_provider`, `meter_provider`, etc) at the top level, and add an additional top level key for `instrumentation` config when appropriate. 

But we can hash out the exact details of the file config schema later when added to the spec. This is just an example of file configuration for the purposes of this OTEP. @MrAlias is https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225#discussion_r1142339164 text saying that the exact schema of the config file is an open question.

Reviewer 7: I've tried to capture the issues in this thread in the open questions section to be addressed in the specification (c7e738b109feb6643c3ba274f7d0506efdf10b50). Therefore, I'm going to resolve this as it being tracked.

Please take a look a the changes, and reopen the discussion if you think this was in error.

* **Flat**. Structured data is only allowed by using higher-level naming or data encoding schemes. Examples of configuration limited by lack of structured configuration include:
  * Configuring multiple span processors, periodic metric readers, or log record processors.
  * Configuring views.
  * Configuring arguments for parent based sampler (sampler parent is remote and sampled vs. not sampled, sampler when parent is local and sampled vs. not sampled).
* **Runtime dependent**. Different systems expose this interface differently (Linux, BSD, Windows). This usually means unique instructions are required to properly interact with the configuration interface on different systems.
* **Limited values**. Many systems only allow string values to be used, but OpenTelemetry specifies many configuration values other than this type. For example, OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES specifies a list of key value pairs to be used as resource attributes, but there is no way to specify array values, or indicate that the value should be interpreted as non-string type.
* **Limited validation**. Validation can only be performed by the receiver, there is no meta-configuration language to validate input.

> * **Difficult to extend**. It’s difficult to anticipate the requirements of configuring custom extension components (processors, exporters, samplers, etc), and likely not practical to represent them in a flat structure. As a result, the environment variable interface is limited to components explicitly mentioned in the specification.

Reviewer 8: nit: I suggest removing this line

1. I see it as a duplicated of "flat".
2. Take notice that env vars OTel spec accepts to use `OTEL_{LANGUAGE}_{FEATURE}` as an extensibility point.

* **Lacks versioning**. The lack of versioning support for environment variables prevents evolution over time.

## Explanation

Using a configuration model or configuration file, users can configure all options currently available via environment variables.

> ### Goals

Reviewer 8: I have a (rather strong) opinion that setting set via env vars has higher priority (takes precedence) over a setting set via configiuration file and it should be marked as a goal.

Reviewer 3: Can you elaborate on what you mean by higher priority? 

Maybe you mean that environment variables should somehow be "layered" on top of a configuration file? If so, I disagree. Consider a config file that says something like:
```
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporters:
      otlp/a:
        endpoint: http://endpoint1
      otlp/b:
        endpoint: http://endpoint2
    span_processors:
      - name: batch
         args:
           exporter: otlp/a
      - name: batch
         args:
           exporter: otlp/b
```
And consider that the environment variable is set with `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://endpoint3`. How would the environment variable take higher priority over the file config? If you replace the endpoints of the two exporters in the file config with the env variable value `http://endpoint3`, you're almost certainly not doing what the user would want. 

Any scheme where environment variables have priority over a config file will require some sort of standard mapping between the environment variable schema and file config scheme. IMO, its impossible to define such a mapping which is intuitive in all cases, so better not to try. 

Nothing is forcing users to use file based config - its opt in. If they do opt in, they're opting into the documented behavior in which the config file represents the source of truth for configuration. If they wish to customize the experience with additional layers / overrides, they have a couple of tools:
1. They can use the fact the `Configure(config)` API accepts a config model as an argument, and provide their own customizations to the model after the initial parsing of the file via `Parse(file)`. An example of such a customization would be to interpret environment variables and apply them to the model in a way they decide makes sense.
2. They can use environment variable substitution to reference environment variables directly in a configuration file.

This is a pretty flexible toolkit, and allows users to have simple, intuitive out of the box behavior, while allowing for customization if the default is insufficient.

Reviewer 8: I agree with you 👍 😉

* The structure of the configuration can be validated via a schema.
* Support environment variable substitution to give users the option to avoid storing secrets in these files.

#### Out of scope

* Embedding additional configuration files within a configuration file through an expression. Additional configuration providers MAY choose to support this use-case in the future.

## Internal details

The schema for OpenTelemetry configuration is to be published in a repository to allow language implementations to leverage that definition to automatically generate code and/or validate end-user configuration. This will ensure that all implementations provide a consistent experience for any version of the schema they support. An example of such a proposed schema is available [here](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/tree/main/json_schema/schema).

The working group proposes the use of [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) as the language to define the schema. It provides:

* support for client-side validation
* code generation
* broad support across languages

In order to provide a minimal API surface area, implementations *MUST* support the following methods.

> ### Configure(config)

Reviewer 8: How we will make sure that a config set by an env var will not be overridden?

Reviewer 3: Let's talk about this in a single place [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225/files#r1142621820).

> An API called `Configure` receives a configuration object. This method applies the configuration object's details to the SDK. This method specifically applies the configuration object to allow for multiple configuration format providers to be supported in the future. This OTEP describes two such providers in a file and data structure formats below, but remote file formats *MAY* be implemented in the future.

Reviewer 2: This discussion became "outdated", but it's not addressed: https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225#discussion_r1116286908

Reviewer 3: I think the original comment has been addressed. If not, let's reoopen.

> ### Configure(config)
> 
> An API called `Configure` receives a configuration object. This method applies the configuration object's details to the SDK. This method specifically applies the configuration object to allow for multiple configuration format providers to be supported in the future. This OTEP describes two such providers in a file and data structure formats below, but remote file formats *MAY* be implemented in the future.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Configure(config) -> (TracerProvider, MeterProvider, LoggerProvider)

An API called Configure receives a configuration object and returns SDK components (TracerProvider, MeterProvider, LoggerProvider).

The resulting SDK component configuration SHOULD strictly reflect the configuration object's details and ignore the [opentelemetry environment variable configuration scheme](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/sdk-environment-variables.md).

This method can be invoked multiple times using different configuration arguments, with each invocation producing a separate set of SDK components. It is the caller's responsibility to ensure the resulting SDK components are correctly wired into the application and instrumentation. 
```

Reviewer 2: I like this more than `global.Configure()`, which is by design required to have undocumented side effects. 

But it still does not address the concern of supporting dynamic configuration, because after the initial Configure() call the rest of the application would be already initialized with specific providers. Dynamic configuration means changing the _behavior_ of already instantiated objects, not creating new objects. I would rather have something like this:
```
interface Configurator {
    // apply can be called multiple times and may change the behavior of previously returned providers.
    void apply(Configuration);

    TracerProvider  getTracerProvider();
    MeterProvider   getTracerProvider();
    LoggerProvider getTracerProvider();
}
```

Reviewer 3: So in the interface you describe, the getters initially return empty providers, and invocations of `apply` update the providers with the `Configuration`?

If so, this is quite similar to proposal I made [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225#discussion_r1129622820) to add a `update(Configuration, TracerProvider, MeterProvider, LoggerProvider)` operation in the future, which when invoked, would apply the configuration to the providers passed as arguments. 

I feel like either way we spec it, an implementation would be compliant doing what you describe or what I describe. 

I'm happy to try to find words to describe the interface you propose, and use the code snippet you provide as an example.

Reviewer 2: +1. To avoid the empty providers (it's weird indeed):
```
interface Configurator {
    TracerProvider  getTracerProvider();
    MeterProvider   getMeterProvider();
    LoggerProvider  getLoggerProvider();
}

cfgr = new StaticConfigurator(config)

class DynamicConfigurator extends Configurator {
   // apply can be called multiple times and may change the behavior
   // of previously returned providers.
   void update(Configuration);
}

cfgr = new DynamicConfigurator(config)
cfgr.update(config)
```

### Parse(file) -> config

An API called `Parse` receives a file object. The method loads the contents of the file, parses it, and validates that the configuration against the schema. At least one of JSON or YAML MUST be supported. If either format can be supported without additional dependencies, that format SHOULD be preferred. If neither or both formats are supported, YAML should be the preferred choice. If YAML is not supported due to dependency concerns, there MAY be a way for a user to explicitly enable it by installing their own dependency.

The method returns a `Configuration` model that has been validated. This API *MAY* return an error or raise an exception, whichever is idiomatic to the implementation for the following reasons:

* file doesn't exist or is invalid
* configuration parsed is invalid

#### Python Parse example

```python

filepath = "./config.yaml"

try:
  cfg = opentelemetry.Parse(filepath)
except Exception as e:
  print(e)

filepath = "./config.json"

try:

>   cfg = opentelemetry.Parse(filepath)

Reviewer 2: and then what?

Reviewer 5: It is an example of only `Parse`. But in a fuller example then `Configure` would be called with the result of `Parse`.

* `OTEL_CONFIG_FILE`

The format for the configuration file will be detected using the file extension of this variable.

### Configuration model

To allow SDKs and instrumentation libraries to accept configuration without having to implement the parsing logic, a `Configuration` model *MAY* be provided by implementations. This object:

* has already been parsed from a file or data structure
* is structurally valid (errors may yet occur when SDK or instrumentation interprets the object)

### Configuration file

The following demonstrates an example of a configuration file format (full example [here](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/blob/main/config.yaml)):

```yaml
# include version specification in configuration files to help with parsing and schema evolution.
file_format: 0.1
sdk:
  # Disable the SDK for all signals.
  #
  # Boolean value. If "true", a no-op SDK implementation will be used for all telemetry
  # signals. Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect and the SDK
  # will remain enabled. This setting has no effect on propagators configured through
  # the OTEL_PROPAGATORS variable.
  #
  # Environment variable: OTEL_SDK_DISABLED

>   disabled: false

Reviewer 9: What is the reasoning behind choosing `disabled` instead of `enabled`? 

I believe it makes sense to use the same rule across OTel in general, including the collector, which uses `enabled` not `disabled`. Will we migrate all the Collector configs from enabled?

Personally, I'd lean toward `enabled` just to avoid the double negation.

Reviewer 3: The goal here was to align with this phrasing from the [sdk environment variable spec](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blame/main/specification/sdk-environment-variables.md#L23-L24).

> All Boolean environment variables SHOULD be named and defined such that false is the expected safe default behavior. Renaming or changing the default value MUST NOT happen without a major version upgrade.

While this is not an environment variable, its still a reasonable position and I'd rather not rehash the lengthy debate from [#2755](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2755). 🙂

Reviewer 9: Do we have to apply to same rule for booleans in the yaml configs, given that we have this note?

> Note that there is no consistent mapping between environment variable names and the keys in the configuration file.

Reviewer 3: > Do we have to apply to same rule for booleans in the yaml configs, given that we have this note?

We don't have to, but IMO we should.

But regardless of what my opinion is on this subject, we'd like to keep the exact schema of the configuration file is out of scope for this OTEP. This merely illustrates an example. The exact details will have to be hashed out later in the specification. @MrAlias is [going to add](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225#discussion_r1142339164) text saying that the exact schema of the config file is an open question.

Reviewer 10: @jpkrohling Thanks for the feedback, definitely something to ponder. This OTEP doesn't take a strong position on this, and as Tyler mentioned, this is included in the Open Questions section, so we will have to discuss that once this hits the Spec.

  # Configure resource attributes and resource detection for all signals.
  resource:
    # Key-value pairs to be used as resource attributes.
    #
    # Environment variable: OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES
    attributes:
      # Sets the value of the `service.name` resource attribute
      #
      # Environment variable: OTEL_SERVICE_NAME
      service.name: !!str "unknown_service"
  # Configure context propagators. Each propagator has a name and args used to configure it. None of the propagators here have configurable options so args is not demonstrated.
  #
  # Environment variable: OTEL_PROPAGATORS

>   propagators: [tracecontext, baggage]

Reviewer 11: How would I be able to use a `google-trace` propagator?

  # Configure the tracer provider.
  tracer_provider:
    # Span exporters. Each exporter key refers to the type of the exporter. Values configure the exporter. Exporters must be associated with a span processor.

>     exporters:

Reviewer 11: How would I be able to support an exporter that is not built-in to the tracing spec? For example, how would I be able to configure the `google-trace` exporter [1]? Currently, OpenTelemetry specification appears to only favour one commercial tracing backend.

[1] https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/opentelemetry-operations-js#opentelemetry-google-cloud-trace-exporter

Reviewer 11: Would it be beneficial to allow to `register` exporters/propagators etc to the SDK? So a user would be able to register `google-trace` and then at the same time be able to use `OTEL_PROPAGATORS` and similar variables?

Reviewer 3: Yup this proposal intends custom extension components (samplers, exporters, propagators, processors) to be referenced in the config file. How exactly those extension components are resolved is a language specific problem. In java, we use SPIs (service provider interface) to allow custom components to be provided by libraries or users.

          baz: qux

  # Configure the meter provider.
  ...
```

Note that there is no consistent mapping between environment variable names and the keys in the configuration file.

### Environment variable substitution

Configuration files *MUST* support environment variable expansion. While this accommodates the scenario in which a configuration file needs to reference sensitive data and is not able to be stored securely, environment variable expansion is not limited to sensitive data.

As a starting point for development, the syntax for environment variable expansion *MAY* mirror the [collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#configuration-environment-variables).

For example, given an environment where `API_KEY=1234`, the configuration file contents:

```yaml
file_format: 0.1
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: https://example.host:4317/v1/traces
        headers:
          api-key: ${env:API_KEY}
```

Result in the following after substitution:

```yaml
file_format: 0.1
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: https://example.host:4317/v1/traces
        headers:
          api-key: 1234
```

> Implementations *MUST* perform environment variable substitution before validating and parsing configuration file contents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Implementations *MUST* perform environment variable substitution before validating and parsing configuration file contents.

If a configuration file references an environment variable which is undefined, implementations *MUST* return an error or raise an exception. 
```

* **Lacks versioning**. The lack of versioning support for environment variables prevents evolution over time.

## Explanation

Using a configuration model or configuration file, users can configure all options currently available via environment variables.

### Goals

* The configuration must be language implementation agnostic. It must not contain structure or statements that only can be interpreted in a subset of languages. This does not preclude the possibility that the configuration can have specific extensions included for a subset of languages, but it does mean that the configuration must be interpretable by all implementation languages.
* Broadly supported format. Ideally, the information encoded in the file can be decoded using native tools for all OpenTelemetry implementation languages. However, it must be possible for languages that do not natively support an encoding format to write their own parsers.
* The configuration format must support structured data. At the minimum arrays and associative arrays.

> * The format must support at least null, boolean, string, double precision floating point (IEEE 754-1985), and signed 64 bit integer value types.

Reviewer 8: Should `null` be not simply "non-existing"? Meaning that some things are "required" and some are "optional". I do not think we need to have `null` in the configuration file. Therfore, I do not see why the format must support `null`.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* The format must support at least boolean, string, double precision floating point (IEEE 754-1985), and signed 64 bit integer value types.
```

Author: Thanks @pellared!

```

Result in the following after substitution:

```yaml
file_format: 0.1
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: https://example.host:4317/v1/traces
        headers:
          api-key: 1234
```

Implementations *MUST* perform environment variable substitution before validating and parsing configuration file contents.

#### Handling environment variable & file config overlap

When both configuration file and environment variables are present, the implementation *MUST* ignore environment variables in preference of the configuration file. The support for environment variable substitution in the configuration file gives users a mechanism for migrating away from environment variables in favour of configuration files.

### Version guarantees & backwards compatibility

Each version of the configuration schema carries a major and minor version. Configurations specify the major and minor version they adhere to. Before reaching 1.0, each minor version change is equivalent to major version change. That is, there are no guarantees about compatibility and all changes are permitted. As of 1.0, we provide the following stability guarantees:

> * For major version: No guarantees.
> * For minor versions:
>   * Property keys will not change. Although the addition of optional properties is permitted and the removal of properties is permitted, this *MUST* not be abused to rename property keys.
>   * Property value types will not change, except that integers MAY become floating points.
>   * No additional required properties.
> 
> Allowable changes:
> 
> * For major versions: All changes are permitted.
> * For minor versions:
>   * Addition of optional properties.
>   * Required property keys may become optional.
>   * Removal of properties, provided that the property key is not reused in the future.
> 
> SDKs validating configuration *MUST* fail when they encounter a configuration with an unsupported version. Generally, this means fail when encountering a major version which is not recognized. An SDK might choose to maintain a library of validators / parsers for each major version, and use the configuration version to select and use the correct instance. Differences in minor versions (except pre-1.0 minor versions) *MUST* be acceptable, with the caveat that allowable property additions and removals MAY result in configuration that is different than excepted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* For major version: No guarantees.
* For minor versions: TBD

Allowable changes:

* For major versions: All changes are permitted.
* For minor versions: TBD

SDKs validating configuration *MUST* fail when they encounter a configuration with an unsupported version. Generally, this means fail when encountering a major version which is not recognized. An SDK might choose to maintain a library of validators / parsers for each major version, and use the configuration version to select and use the correct instance. Differences in minor versions (except pre-1.0 minor versions) *MUST* be acceptable.
```

### Environment variable substitution

Configuration files *MUST* support environment variable expansion. While this accommodates the scenario in which a configuration file needs to reference sensitive data and is not able to be stored securely, environment variable expansion is not limited to sensitive data.

As a starting point for development, the syntax for environment variable expansion *MAY* mirror the [collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#configuration-environment-variables).

For example, given an environment where `API_KEY=1234`, the configuration file contents:

```yaml
file_format: 0.1
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: https://example.host:4317/v1/traces
        headers:
          api-key: ${env:API_KEY}
```

Result in the following after substitution:

```yaml
file_format: 0.1
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: https://example.host:4317/v1/traces
        headers:
          api-key: 1234
```

Implementations *MUST* perform environment variable substitution before validating and parsing configuration file contents.

> If a configuration file references an environment variable which is undefined, implementations *MUST* return an error or raise an exception. 

Reviewer 3: The syntax for substitution is inherited from the [collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#configuration-environment-variables). If were to add additional syntax in the future for default values (which I think is a good idea) I think it's reasonable to relax this and only raise / throw if a default value is not specified.

I'd rather punt on adding new default syntax for now because the existing syntax doesn't exactly match [shell parameter expansion](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Shell-Parameter-Expansion.html) syntax.

* Broadly supported format. Ideally, the information encoded in the file can be decoded using native tools for all OpenTelemetry implementation languages. However, it must be possible for languages that do not natively support an encoding format to write their own parsers.
* The configuration format must support structured data. At the minimum arrays and associative arrays.
* The format must support at least boolean, string, double precision floating point (IEEE 754-1985), and signed 64 bit integer value types.
* Custom span processors, exporters, samplers, or other user defined extension components can be configured using this format.
* Configure SDK, but also configure instrumentation.
* Must offer stability guarantees while supporting evolution.
* The structure of the configuration can be validated via a schema.
* Support environment variable substitution to give users the option to avoid storing secrets in these files.

#### Out of scope

* Embedding additional configuration files within a configuration file through an expression. Additional configuration providers MAY choose to support this use-case in the future.

## Internal details

> The schema for OpenTelemetry configuration is to be published in a repository to allow language implementations to leverage that definition to automatically generate code and/or validate end-user configuration. This will ensure that all implementations provide a consistent experience for any version of the schema they support. An example of such a proposed schema is available [here](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/tree/main/json_schema/schema).

Reviewer 12: You could consider adding this file as supplementary content to this PR (https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/tree/main/text/images or similar) for longevity.

Author: Added the config and schema examples to `text/assets`.

The working group proposes the use of [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) as the language to define the schema. It provides:

* support for client-side validation
* code generation
* broad support across languages

In order to provide a minimal API surface area, implementations *MUST* support the following:

### Parse(file) -> config

> An API called `Parse` receives a file object. The method loads the contents of the file, parses it, and validates that the configuration against the schema. At least one of JSON or YAML MUST be supported. If either format can be supported without additional dependencies, that format SHOULD be preferred. If neither or both formats are supported, YAML should be the preferred choice. If YAML is not supported due to dependency concerns, there MAY be a way for a user to explicitly enable it by installing their own dependency.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
An API called `Parse` receives a file object. The method loads the contents of the file, parses it, and validates that the configuration against the schema. At least one of JSON or YAML MUST be supported. If either format can be supported without additional dependencies, that format SHOULD be preferred. If neither or both formats are supported natively, YAML should be the preferred choice. If YAML is not supported due to dependency concerns, there MAY be a way for a user to explicitly enable it by installing their own dependency.
```

`Configurer` **MAY** be extended in the future with functionality to apply an updated configuration model to the resulting SDK components.

#### Create(config) -> Configurer

Create a `Configurer` from a [configuration model](#configuration-model).

#### Get TracerProvider, MeterProvider, LoggerProvider

Interpret the [configuration model](#configuration-model) and return SDK TracerProvider, MeterProvider, LoggerProvider which strictly reflect the configuration object's details and ignores the [opentelemetry environment variable configuration scheme](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/sdk-environment-variables.md).

### Configuration model

To allow SDKs and instrumentation libraries to accept configuration without having to implement the parsing logic, a `Configuration` model *MAY* be provided by implementations. This object:

* has already been parsed from a file or data structure
* is structurally valid (errors may yet occur when SDK or instrumentation interprets the object)

### Configuration file

> The following demonstrates an example of a configuration file format (full example [here](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/blob/main/config.yaml)):

Reviewer 12: You could consider adding this file as supplementary content to this PR (https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/tree/main/text/images or similar) for longevity.

Author: Added the config and schema examples to text/assets.

### Integration with auto-instrumentation

The configuration model could be integrated to work with the existing auto-instrumentation tooling in each language implementation.

#### Java

The Java implementation provides a JAR that supports configuring various parameters via system properties. This implementation could leverage a configuration file by supporting its configuration a system property:

```bash
java -javaagent:path/to/opentelemetry-javaagent.jar \
     -Dotel.config=./config.yaml
     -jar myapp.jar
```

#### Python

The Python implementation has a command available that allows users to leverage auto-instrumentation. The `opentelemetry-instrument` command could use a `--config` flag to pass in a config file:

```bash
# install the instrumentation package
pip install opentelemetry-instrumentation
# use a --config parameter to pass in the configuration file
# NOTE: this parameter does not currently exist and would need to be added

> opentelemetry-instrument --config ./config.yaml ./python/app.py

Reviewer 13: We give guidance for a default name and location or do we plan to always require explicit location?  I support the file path being explicit, but perhaps that should be called out as a requirement?

Author: I think this makes sense to call out in the specification PRs 👍🏻

* **Limited values**. Many systems only allow string values to be used, but OpenTelemetry specifies many configuration values other than this type. For example, OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES specifies a list of key value pairs to be used as resource attributes, but there is no way to specify array values, or indicate that the value should be interpreted as non-string type.
* **Limited validation**. Validation can only be performed by the receiver, there is no meta-configuration language to validate input.
* **Difficult to extend**. It’s difficult to anticipate the requirements of configuring custom extension components (processors, exporters, samplers, etc), and likely not practical to represent them in a flat structure. As a result, the environment variable interface is limited to components explicitly mentioned in the specification.
* **Lacks versioning**. The lack of versioning support for environment variables prevents evolution over time.

## Explanation

Using a configuration model or configuration file, users can configure all options currently available via environment variables.

> ### Goals

Reviewer 14: Two more goals that might be added or excluded explicitly:

* The use of multiple configuration files (like the collector allows it today)
* The possibility to include a configuration file into another one via an expression.

Reviewer 3: > The use of multiple configuration files (like the collector allows it today)

Support for this is implied because you can programmatically load a config file and produce an SDK from it. Can do this multiple times if needed, with the caller responsible for passing the SDK instances to the appropriate places in the application.

> The possibility to include a configuration file into another one via an expression.

👎 I disagree. Layering config files is too complicated for the initial deliverable and would slow down a simpler solution that would work most of the time. Environment variable substitution can be used as a less powerful stand in.

Author: I've added "The possibility to include a configuration file into another one via an expression." as "Out of scope" under "goals" as I agree it adds a lot of complexity to the initial implementation.

> The use of multiple configuration files (like the collector allows it today)

@svrnm did you imagine this working as it does with the collector where the configuration is merged? if so then I would say that this is not implied, as repeatedly calling a function to load a config file doesn't imply that the resulting configured SDK is a merge of the previous calls.

Reviewer 3: > did you imagine this working as it does with the collector where the configuration is merged

Thanks for clarifying - I wasn't aware the collector did this.

Reviewer 14: > I've added "The possibility to include a configuration file into another one via an expression." as "Out of scope" under "goals" as I agree it adds a lot of complexity to the initial implementation.

I am OK with that, I just thought it would be good to clarify that.

> > The use of multiple configuration files (like the collector allows it today)
> 
> @svrnm did you imagine this working as it does with the collector where the configuration is merged? if so then I would say that this is not implied, as repeatedly calling a function to load a config file doesn't imply that the resulting configured SDK is a merge of the previous calls.

yes, this was what I was thinking about while reading through the OTEP. I just think about how end users interact with OpenTelemetry and if they see they can do it with a collector, they will definitely try to do the same with SDK configuration. Especially if a vendor-agnostic and vendor-specific config are supplied, this might become handy. Or, let's say you have a bunch of applications running on a k8s cluster and there is some generic configuration and some specific configuration you want to apply.

* The configuration must be language implementation agnostic. It must not contain structure or statements that only can be interpreted in a subset of languages. This does not preclude the possibility that the configuration can have specific extensions included for a subset of languages, but it does mean that the configuration must be interpretable by all implementation languages.
* Broadly supported format. Ideally, the information encoded in the file can be decoded using native tools for all OpenTelemetry implementation languages. However, it must be possible for languages that do not natively support an encoding format to write their own parsers.
* The configuration format must support structured data. At the minimum arrays and associative arrays.
* The format must support at least null, boolean, string, double precision floating point (IEEE 754-1985), and signed 64 bit integer value types.
* Custom span processors, exporters, samplers, or other user defined extension components can be configured using this format.
* Configure SDK, but also configure instrumentation.

> * Must offer stability guarantees while supporting evolution

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Must offer stability guarantees while supporting evolution.
```

The working group proposes the use of [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) as the language to define the schema. It provides:

* support for client-side validation
* code generation
* broad support across languages

In order to provide a minimal API surface area, implementations *MUST* support the following methods.

### Configure(config)

An API called `Configure` receives a configuration object. This method then applies the configuration object's details to the SDK. This method specifically applies the configuration object to allow for multiple configuration format providers to be supported in the future. This OTEP describes two such providers in a file and data structure formats below, but remote file formats *MAY* be implemented in the future.

### ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filepath, format) -> config

> An API called `ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile` receives a string parameter indicating the file path containing the configuration to be parsed. An optional format parameter may be provided to indicate the format that this configuration uses. YAML *SHOULD* be supported, but JSON, which is a strict subset of YAML, *MAY* be supported if a language ecosystem has good reason. The method returns a `Configuration` model that has been validated. This API *MAY* return an error or raise an exception, whichever is idiomatic to the implementation for the following reasons:

Reviewer 4: I suggest that we don't put restriction on the exact parameters such as "filepath" and "format", instead, we can emphasize the intention/functionality of the API.

For example, I want to make sure that it's _okay_ to have an API like this ```ValidateConfiguration(FileStream stream)``` which automatically detects the encoding/format.

Author: I've taken a go at generalizing the description, please take a look and suggest any additional updates.

* file doesn't exist or is invalid
* configuration parsed is invalid

#### Python ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile example

```python

> filename = "./config.yaml"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
filepath = "./config.yaml"
```

            "timeout":  10000,
          },
          "otlp": config{},
        },
        "span_processors": []config{
          {
            "name": "batch",
            "args": config{
              "schedule_delay":        5000,
              "export_timeout":        30000,
              "max_queue_size":        2048,
              "max_export_batch_size": 512,
              "exporter":              "zipkin",
            },
          },
        },
      },
      ...
    },
  },
)
```

### Configuration file

The following demonstrates an example of a configuration file format (full example [here](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/blob/main/config.yaml)):

```yaml
# include version specification in configuration files to help with parsing and schema evolution.
scheme_version: 0.1
sdk:
  # Disable the SDK for all signals.
  #
  # Boolean value. If "true", a no-op SDK implementation will be used for all telemetry
  # signals. Any other value or absence of the variable will have no effect and the SDK
  # will remain enabled. This setting has no effect on propagators configured through
  # the OTEL_PROPAGATORS variable.
  #

>   # Environment variable: OTEL_SDK_DISABLED

Reviewer 15: Is there a consistent mapping between env variable names and keys in the config file?

Reviewer 3: By consistent I assume you mean that you can infer the equivalent position of an environment variable in the schema based on its name. Something like `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED` maps to:
```
otel:
  sdk:
    disabled: ...
```
There is not a consistent mapping.

Reviewer: +1 for no consistent mapping. The environment variables are named inconsistently and this is a perfect time to rectify that mistake

Author: Added a note that there is no consistent mapping between environment variables and keys in the config.

      #
      # Environment variable: OTEL_SERVICE_NAME
      service.name: !!str "unknown_service"
  # Configure context propagators. Each propagator has a name and args used to configure it. None of the propagators here have configurable options so args is not demonstrated.
  #
  # Environment variable: OTEL_PROPAGATORS
  propagators: [tracecontext, baggage]
  # Configure the tracer provider.
  tracer_provider:
    # Span exporters. Each exporter key refers to the type of the exporter. Values configure the exporter. Exporters must be associated with a span processor.
    exporters:
      # Configure the zipkin exporter.
      zipkin:
        # Sets the endpoint.
        #
        # Environment variable: OTEL_EXPORTER_ZIPKIN_ENDPOINT
        endpoint: http://localhost:9411/api/v2/spans
        # Sets the max time to wait for each export.
        #
        # Environment variable: OTEL_EXPORTER_ZIPKIN_TIMEOUT
        timeout: 10000
    # List of span processors. Each span processor has a name and args used to configure it.
    span_processors:
      # Add a batch span processor.
      #
      # Environment variable: OTEL_BSP_*, OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER

>       - name: batch

Reviewer 10: What about custom components? I'm suspecting custom schemas will have to be offered from users extending functionality, e.g. `CustomSampler` or `CachedSpanProcessor` mapping to `custom` and `cached` respectively (specially useful for at-runtime-loaded components). If this was already considered, an example would be great.

Reviewer 3: Supporting custom components (processors, exporters, samplers, etc) is [one of the goals](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225/files#diff-bd4bde8aa8b94a5c3332731193eb54f01b2000c861620e7ec6263d382a4b5979R33).

The syntax for referencing a custom processor would likely just be:
```
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    span_processors:
      - name: my-custom-processor
         args:
           foo: bar
           baz: qux
```
I think how exactly custom components are loaded with the configuration arguments is going to vary on a language by language basis.

In java, we publish [SPIs](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/tree/main/sdk-extensions/autoconfigure-spi/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/autoconfigure/spi) for providing custom components which can be referenced by name during configuration. For example, users can implement [ConfigurableSpanExporterProvider](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/main/sdk-extensions/autoconfigure-spi/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/autoconfigure/spi/traces/ConfigurableSpanExporterProvider.java) and reference the provided name in `OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER`. 

I imagine we'd use a similar mechanism for file based config. We could pass the args (i.e. `{foo: bar, baz: qux}`) via the `ConfigProperties` passed to method used to [create](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/main/sdk-extensions/autoconfigure-spi/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/autoconfigure/spi/traces/ConfigurableSpanExporterProvider.java#L23) the component.

Author: Added an example of a custom processor as per @jack-berg's example.

        endpoint: https://example.host:4317/v1/traces
        headers:
          api-key: 1234
```

Implementations *MUST* perform environment variable substitution before validating and parsing configuration file contents.

### Version guarantees & backwards compatibility

Each version of the configuration schema carries a major and minor version. Configurations specify the major and minor version they adhere to. Before reaching 1.0, each minor version change is equivalent to major version change. That is, there are no guarantees about compatibility and all changes are permitted. As of 1.0, we provide the following stability guarantees:

* For major version: No guarantees.
* For minor versions:
  * Property keys will not change. Although the addition of optional properties is permitted and the removal of properties is permitted, this *MUST* not be abused to rename property keys.
  * Property value types will not change, except that integers MAY become floating points.
  * No additional required properties.

Allowable changes:

* For major versions: All changes are permitted.
* For minor versions:
  * Addition of optional properties.
  * Required property keys may become optional.

>   * Removal of properties, provided that the property key is not reused in the future.

Reviewer 15: What's the rationale for allowing removal? It seems pretty disruptive to me.

Reviewer 3: No strong rational. Generally was trying to mirror schema evolution rules of other systems like [protobuf](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/proto3/#updating) and [avro](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/avro.html), which both allow removal of fields.

This is far from an exhaustive list of the types of changes that are possible in json schema. There are [things like](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/) conditions, composition, regular expression, etc which aren't obvious in terms of backwards compatibility. I think we'll have to have general goals about not breaking users, and build up a set of rules as we encounter new proposals for changes.

Reviewer 8: These would mean that the "validation/parsing/loading" would not be "strict", right? So if one makes e.g. `instrumetations:` instead of ``instrumentations:` it will be a NOOP? I do not think it would be desired.

Motivating example: https://www.jsonschemavalidator.net/s/jIlDubSn

I think we could only deprecate a field in a minor version.

```suggestion
  * Deprecation of properties.
```

Reviewer 3: We discussed this in the 3/6 Configuration Working Group and decided that its premature to specify the allowable changes in the minor versions.

We think its best to:
* Keep the language which says "Before reaching 1.0, each minor version change is equivalent to major version change. That is, there are no guarantees about compatibility and all changes are permitted."
* Adjust the compatibility guarantees and allowable changes for minor version to simply be "TBD". We think this better reflects the reality that we'll need to develop the evolution rules over time as we encounter new situations.

Proposed text change [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225/files#r1128610084).

### Errors or difficulty in configuration files

Configuration files provide an opportunity for misconfiguration. A way to mitigate this would be to provide clear messaging and fail quickly when misconfiguration occurs.

## Prior art and alternatives

The working group looked to the OpenTelemetry Collector and OpenTelemetry Operator for inspiration and guidance.

### Alternative schema languages

In choosing to recommend JSON schema, the working group looked at the following options:

* [Cue](https://cuelang.org/) - A promising simpler language to define a schema, the working group decided against CUE because:
  * Tooling available for validating CUE files in languages outside of Go were limited.
  * Familiarity and learning curve would create problems for both users and contributors of OpenTelemetry.
* [Protobuf](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers) - With protobuf already used heavily in OpenTelemetry, the format was worth investigating as an option to define the schema. The working group decided against Protobuf because:
  * Validation errors are the result of serlization errors which can be difficult to interpret.

>   * Limitations in the schema definition language result in poor ergonomics if type safety is to be retained.

Reviewer 2: I would like to see more concrete examples of these restrictions.

These reasons only consider the client/consumption side. To me the remote feature of configuration is one of very important ones, and that means we now have to introduce a whole new tool chain of JSON Schema in the server-side authoring & serving of the configs. I would rather stick with Protobuf, to have a single way to manage data models.

Reviewer 3: I took a stab at modeling a config file with protobuf (schema [here](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/blob/main/protobuf/schema/sdk.proto), example config [here](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/blob/main/protobuf/kitchen-sink.yaml)). Sometimes protobuf works great, but in several circumstances we'd be forced to have worse ergonomics to work around protobuf limitations. 

One example is trying to define a set of resource attributes. With json schema it can look like:

```
sdk:
  resource:
    attributes:
      service.name: my-service
```

With protobuf the same has to look like:

```
sdk:
  resource:
    attributes:
      service.name:
        string_value: my-service
```

Despite being able to infer type of `service.name` unambiguously, protobuf forces the user to provide additional type information in the keys. 

Another example can be seen in configuring components like exporters, where we'd ideally like to be able to enforce a schema based on the name of the key. 

```
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporters:
      otlp:
        protocol: http/protobuf
        endpoint: http://localhost:4318/v1/traces
      otlp/foo:
        protocol: grpc
        endpoint: http://some-other-host:4317
      zipkin:
        endpoint: http://localhost:9411/api/v2/spans
```

So when key matches `otlp(.*)`, enforce the schema for OTLP exporter. When key matches `zipkin(.*)`, enforce the schema for zipkin.

In protobuf if we want to enforce schemas of exporters, we need to work around the constraints of protobuf in a way that is very apparent to the user. There are different ways to do it, but you might end up with something like:

```
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporters:
      otlp:
        otlp_args:
          protocol: http/protobuf
          endpoint: http://localhost:4318/v1/traces
      otlp/foo:
          otlp_args:
            protocol: grpc
            endpoint: http://some-other-host:4317
      zipkin:
        zipkin_args:
           endpoint: http://localhost:9411/api/v2/spans
```

In this example the keys identify the names of the exporter and are referenced when configuring processors. The values are a generic exporter message type, with `oneof` fields that enforce the schema of the specific exporter. 

To me, the benefit of protobuf is that we get to take advantage of the schema evolution rules we've already developed for otlp. Language SIGs are also familiar with working protobuf, so choosing it alleviates the need to learn a new tech. But the downside is that the files become more awkward to write for users. I was personally I big fan of protobuf, but came around to json schema because of the improved user experience. 

> I would rather stick with Protobuf, to have a single way to manage data models.

There's precedent for json schema in the [semantic convention schema definition](https://github.com/open-telemetry/build-tools/blob/v0.15.1/semantic-conventions/syntax.md#json-schema).

There are few other places we define data models which don't use protobuf:

- Collector configuration
- Telemetry schema [file format](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/schemas/file_format_v1.1.0.md)

Author: @yurishkuro do you have any additional thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: sgtm

# OpenTelemetry Configuration

A new configuration interface is proposed here in the form of a configuration model, which can be expressed as a file, and validated through a published schema.

## Motivation

OpenTelemetry specifies code that can operate in a variety of ways based on the end-user’s desired mode of operation. This requires a configuration interface be provided to the user so they are able to communicate this information. Currently, OpenTelemetry specifies this interface in the form of the API exposed by the SDKs and environment variables. This environment variable interface is limited in the structure of information it can communicate and the primitives it can support.

### Environment Variable Interface Limitations

> The environment variable interface suffers from the following identified limitations:

Reviewer 16: Also, environment variables have no versioning scheme, which prevents evolution over time.

Author: Added this to the list 👍🏻

* **Limited values**. Many systems only allow string values to be used, but OpenTelemetry specifies many configuration values other than this type. For example, OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES specifies a list of key value pairs to be used as resource attributes, but there is no way to specify array values, or indicate that the value should be interpreted as non-string type.
* **Limited validation**. Validation can only be performed by the receiver, there is no meta-configuration language to validate input.
* **Difficult to extend**. It’s difficult to anticipate the requirements of configuring custom extension components (processors, exporters, samplers, etc), and likely not practical to represent them in a flat structure. As a result, the environment variable interface is limited to components explicitly mentioned in the specification.

## Explanation

Using a configuration model or configuration file, users can configure all options currently available via environment variables.

> ### Goals

Reviewer 2: This doesn't say anything about static vs. dynamic nature of the configuration, is dynamic completely out of scope?

The most pertinent example of dynamic config is sampling (e.g. Jaeger's remote sampling), but technically can be extended to many other aspects, like size of internal queue in the exporter, metrics aggregation rules, etc.

Reviewer 14: +1 for making clear if/how/when dynamic vs static configuration is in scope. Below interoperability with OpAMP is mentioned, does this mean that the application needs to be restarted or is a reconfiguration possible? 

There's probably a subset of features where dynamic is not applicable (change service_name at runtime??), but many could profit from it, beyond the ones @yurishkuro called out I can think of a few more like enabling/disabling the collection of certain attributes (e.g. python&java have OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_HTTP_CAPTURE_HEADERS_* and I'd like to turn them on/off if needed or some other ways of increasing "verbosity)

Reviewer 5: Yes, dynamic is out of scope.

Reviewer 2: My concern with this is what it means for the dynamic configs to be supported later if we do not account for the possibility from the start. It's a bit like saying "let's first design the front wheels of the car and worry about the back wheels later". We wouldn't want the dynamic configuration to use a completely different config syntax, right?

Reviewer 3: The specification for [MeterProvider](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blame/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md#L117-L123), [TracerProvider](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blame/main/specification/trace/sdk.md#L70-L77), and [LoggerProvider](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blame/main/specification/logs/sdk.md#L55-L61) each have language allowing updating configuration.

When I think about dynamic configuration, I imagine it working as follows:
- A language would need to support reconfiguration of the providers. Maybe in the future the spec upgrades this language from a "MAY" to "SHOULD".
- Some "supervisor" code would interact with a config server. 
- The supervisor would receive config updates in the file format specified in this otep.
- The supervisor would parse the config file, and apply those changes to the providers.

The way I see it, with the addition of file based configuration, all the pieces exist for dynamic configuration. Its up to opamp specification / implementations to weave them together.

Reviewer 3: > My concern with this is what it means for the dynamic configs to be supported later if we do not account for the possibility from the start. It's a bit like saying "let's first design the front wheels of the car and worry about the back wheels later"

Do you have any specific examples in mind where something in this proposal could conflict with a future dynamic configuration solution?

From my perspective, a fair amount of software needs to be written to enable dynamic configuration, buts it seems straight forward the components involved will be the SDKs (with support for updating config), OpAmp for coordinating updates, and file based configuration to the target configuration.

Reviewer 2: This is related to the other unresolved discussion https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225#discussion_r1116286908. In the absence of a proposed API it's impossible to judge how it would affect dynamic configuration chances. For example, an API like `configObj.makeTracerProvider()` is quite difficult to make work with dynamic configuration since it assumes re-creating the provider upon configuration change, any code that already holds a reference to previous provider or tracer won't get config updates.

Reviewer 3: I've [proposed](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225/files#r1129598846) more concrete details for the `Configure` API, which states that it returns SDK components (TracerProvider, MeterProvider, LoggerProvider).

While the specification for TracerProvider, MeterProvider, and LoggerProvider allow for updating configuration, how exactly that API is structured is unspecified. I can imagine dynamic config with file config working in a couple of different ways:
- Perhaps the file configuration component provides an `update(TracerProvider, MeterProvider, LoggerProvider)` API in addition to `configure()`. The responsibility of this method would be to interpret the parsed `Configuration` model, and update the providers to reflect the configuration using whatever APIs the providers expose for updating.
- A simpler variation of this would be to explicitly define the API that the providers should expose to update. I think a good option would be for each provider to have a method called `update`, which accepts an argument called provider of the same type (i.e. `tracerProvider.update(TracerProvider)). When invoked, `update` updates the provider instance it is invoked on to reflect the configuration of its argument. If this API exists, then an OpAmp client receiving updated SDK configuration would simply call `configure(..)` to obtain providers with the new configuration, and call `update(..)` on each of the application's providers, passing the newly obtained providers as arguments. 

> For example, an API like configObj.makeTracerProvider() is quite difficult to make work with dynamic configuration since it assumes re-creating the provider upon configuration change, any code that already holds a reference to previous provider or tracer won't get config updates.

In my proposal this isn't a problem because the existing providers are updated in place.

* The configuration must be language implementation agnostic. It must not contain structure or statements that only can be interpreted in a subset of languages. This does not preclude the possibility that the configuration can have specific extensions included for a subset of languages, but it does mean that the configuration must be interpretable by all implementation languages.
* Broadly supported format. Ideally, the information encoded in the file can be decoded using native tools for all OpenTelemetry implementation languages. However, it must be possible for languages that do not natively support an encoding format to write their own parsers.
* The configuration format must support structured data. At the minimum arrays and associative arrays.

> * The format must support at least null, boolean, string, double precision floating point (IEEE 754-1985), or signed 64 bit integer value types.

Author: Updated to say `and`

* Configure SDK, but also configure instrumentation.
* Must offer stability guarantees while supporting evolution
* The structure of the configuration can be validated via a schema.
* Support environment variable substitution to give users the option to avoid storing secrets in these files.

## Internal details

The schema for OpenTelemetry configuration is to be published in a repository to allow language implementations to leverage that definition to automatically generate code and/or validate end-user configuration. This will ensure that all implementations provide a consistent experience for any version of the schema they support. An example of such a proposed schema is available [here](https://github.com/MrAlias/otel-schema/tree/main/json_schema/schema).

The working group proposes the use of [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) as the language to define the schema. It provides:

* support for client-side validation
* code generation
* broad support across languages

In order to provide a minimal API surface area, implementations *MUST* support the following methods.

### Configure(config)

> An API called `Configure` receives a configuration object. This method then applies the configuration object's details to the SDK. This method specifically applies the configuration object to allow for multiple configuration format providers to be supported in the future. This OTEP describes two such providers in a file and data structure formats below, but remote file formats *MAY* be implemented in the future.

Reviewer 2: Let's provide an end-to-end example.

> An API called `Configure` receives a configuration object. This method then applies the configuration object's details to the SDK. This method specifically applies the configuration object to allow for multiple configuration format providers to be supported in the future. This OTEP describes two such providers in a file and data structure formats below, but remote file formats *MAY* be implemented in the future.

Reviewer 3: > at the moment most SDKs provide imperative constructors for various SDK objects, and sometimes those constructors do a look-aside for env vars.

I think the lack of specificity on this front is a mistake, and I'd like to see file based configuration be more opinionated. 

All languages have imperative constructors. I'd like to see this "configure" API invoke those imperative constructors and return the configured tracer / meter / logger providers. In other words, it's not the responsibility of the providers to be aware of file based config. Separate code validates / parses the files and invokes the constructor APIs as necessary to reflect the configuration.

> An API called `Configure` receives a configuration object. This method then applies the configuration object's details to the SDK. This method specifically applies the configuration object to allow for multiple configuration format providers to be supported in the future. This OTEP describes two such providers in a file and data structure formats below, but remote file formats *MAY* be implemented in the future.

Reviewer: So there should be a Configuration component which sets up the SDK components or an SDK component which encompasses "the SDK" and has the specified configuration object?

> An API called `Configure` receives a configuration object. This method then applies the configuration object's details to the SDK. This method specifically applies the configuration object to allow for multiple configuration format providers to be supported in the future. This OTEP describes two such providers in a file and data structure formats below, but remote file formats *MAY* be implemented in the future.

Reviewer 3: > So there should be a Configuration component which sets up the SDK components 

This. Small clarification I don't have any opinion on how the code that does this is packaged / published (just in case there's any implication in the word "component").

> An API called `Configure` receives a configuration object. This method then applies the configuration object's details to the SDK. This method specifically applies the configuration object to allow for multiple configuration format providers to be supported in the future. This OTEP describes two such providers in a file and data structure formats below, but remote file formats *MAY* be implemented in the future.

Reviewer: I specifically used the word "component" because it was the most general I could think of

> An API called `Configure` receives a configuration object. This method then applies the configuration object's details to the SDK. This method specifically applies the configuration object to allow for multiple configuration format providers to be supported in the future. This OTEP describes two such providers in a file and data structure formats below, but remote file formats *MAY* be implemented in the future.

Reviewer 3: I've added some new language to try to improve clarity [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225/commits/d1cf98cb222e3c367d999efed18c4590b630b9d3). 

Marking this issue as resolved, but please reopen if you feel its not adequately addressed.

> ### ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filepath, format) -> config

Reviewer 2: rename to p34e? :-)

The reason the name is so long is because it mixes a lot of different concerns, which are easy to solve, but first need to address the comment above.

Reviewer 8: Maybe simply `LoadFromFile` 😉

Author: I've updated the method description and name to generalize it, please take a look and suggest any edits necessary.

> An API called `ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile` receives a string parameter indicating the file path containing the configuration to be parsed. An optional format parameter may be provided to indicate the format that this configuration uses. YAML *SHOULD* be supported, but JSON, which is a strict subset of YAML, *MAY* be supported if a language ecosystem has good reason. The method returns a `Configuration` model that has been validated. This API *MAY* return an error or raise an exception, whichever is idiomatic to the implementation for the following reasons:

Reviewer 16: Are there examples of language ecosystems that don't support yaml?  Having yaml universally supported would be nice, but i'm guessing this is here because one such language came up during review.

Reviewer 5: The issue isn't lack of yaml support but that some languages have builtin json support (Javascript, Go) and it makes sense to not require them, JS in particular, to include an additional dependency.

Reviewer 2: Tip: include this motivation into the text directly.

Reviewer 10: (JS _could_ offer yaml as well through an _additional and upcoming_ library)

Author: Included an example where json support may be preferable.

Reviewer: To be clear, JS doesn't support YAML out of the box but the ecosystem has yaml parsers just like any other language. There are plenty of examples of JS libraries which use YAML for configuration.

That said, I would definitely prefer to use language builtins like JSON if possible. Thus far the JS SDK has been able to keep external dependencies to a minimum and I'd like to keep it that way.

It might actually be beneficial to allow arbitrary file types using some pluggable system. This could be accomplished easily using dynamic requires based on the configuration file extension in node for example.

* file doesn't exist or is invalid
* configuration parsed is invalid

#### Python ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile example

```python

filename = "./config.yaml"

try:
  cfg = opentelemetry.ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filename)
except Exception as e:
  print(e)

filename = "./config.json"

try:
  cfg = opentelemetry.ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filename, format="json")
except Exception as e:
  raise e

```

#### Go ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile example

```go

filename := "./config.yaml"
cfg, err := otel.ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filename)
if err != nil {
  return err
}

filename := "./config.json"
cfg, err := otel.ParseAndValidateConfigurationFromFile(filename, otelconfig.WithFormat("json"))
if err != nil {
  return err
}

```

Implementations *MUST* allow users to specify an environment variable to set the configuration file. This gives flexibility to end users of implementations that do not support command line arguments. Some possible names for this variable:

* `OTEL_CONFIGURATION_FILE`

> * `OTEL_CONFIG_FILE`

Author: Done

* `OTEL_CONF`

### Configuration model

To allow SDKs and instrumentation libraries to accept configuration without having to implement the parsing logic, a `Configuration` model *MAY* be provided by implementations. This object:

* has already been parsed from a file or data structure
* is structurally valid (errors may yet occur when SDK or instrumentation interprets the object)

> ### Additional interface: ParseAndValidateConfiguration

Reviewer 3: Good points. Agree that if an implementation chooses to expose a `Configuration` model, it can be passed directly to the SDK.

> ### Additional interface: ParseAndValidateConfiguration

Reviewer 10: +1 on removing the free-form dictionary. It can be added later _if/as_ needed.

> ### Additional interface: ParseAndValidateConfiguration

Author: Removed 👍🏻

Each language implementation supporting OpenTelemetry *MAY* support parsing a data structure instead of a file to produce a model. This allows implementations to provide a configuration interface without the expectation on users to parse a configuration file. The following demonstrates how Python and Go may provide a configuration interface to accomplish this:

#### Python ParseAndValidateConfiguration example

```python
opentelemetry.ParseAndValidateConfiguration(
    {

>         "scheme_version": "0.0.1",

Reviewer 17: Worth calling out explicitly this is not to be confused with the spec schema version?

Author: Are you thinking this should be called out in the otep or in the specification?

Reviewer 16: TBH, it could probably just be called "version".

Reviewer 15: It is called `file_format` in Schema Files: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/schemas/file_format_v1.1.0.md

Reviewer 3: ➕ to `file_format` for consistency.

Author: Renamed to file_format.

        args:
          # Sets the delay interval between two consecutive exports.
          #
          # Environment variable: OTEL_BSP_SCHEDULE_DELAY
          schedule_delay: 5000
          # Sets the maximum allowed time to export data.
          #
          # Environment variable: OTEL_BSP_EXPORT_TIMEOUT
          export_timeout: 30000
          # Sets the maximum queue size.
          #
          # Environment variable: OTEL_BSP_MAX_QUEUE_SIZE
          max_queue_size: 2048
          # Sets the maximum batch size.
          #
          # Environment variable: OTEL_BSP_MAX_EXPORT_BATCH_SIZE
          max_export_batch_size: 512
          # Sets the exporter. Exporter must refer to a key in sdk.tracer_provider.exporters.
          #
          # Environment variable: OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER
          exporter: zipkin
  # Configure the meter provider.
  ...
```

### Environment variable substitution

Configuration files *MUST* support environment variable expansion. While this accommodates the scenario in which a configuration file needs to reference sensitive data and is not able to be stored securely, environment variable expansion is not limited to sensitive data.

> The syntax for environment variable expansion mirrors the [collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#configuration-environment-variables).

Reviewer 16: If we ever want to be able to support regexp within the config, we will need to define a mechanism to "escape" `$` symbols like the collector does as well.

Reviewer 3: Agreed. I think that's implied currently.

Reviewer: Is there any risk to linking the OTEP to collector syntax like that? What if the collector syntax changes? Should we link to a frozen point in time as a starting point? I would prefer to have the syntax in the specification instead of the collector even if the initial version is a direct copy.

Reviewer 5: For the actual spec it definitely needs to be spec'ed out and not just point to the collector. But for the OTEP I don't think there is need for more than stating the basis for the syntax that'll be used.

Reviewer 3: The link from this line points to docs that say:

> Use $$ to indicate a literal $. For example, representing $DataVisualization would look like the following:

```
exporters:
  prometheus:
    endpoint: prometheus:8889
    namespace: $$DataVisualization
```

Is any additional syntax needed for regex?

Author: I've updated the text to reflect that the collector's env var expansion is the starting point here. We can agree on the details during the specification discussion if others agree.

For example, given an environment where `API_KEY=1234`, the configuration file contents:

```yaml
scheme_version: 0.1
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: https://example.host:4317/v1/traces
        headers:
          api-key: ${env:API_KEY}
```

Result in the following after substitution:

```yaml
scheme_version: 0.1
sdk:
  tracer_provider:
    exporters:
      otlp:
        endpoint: https://example.host:4317/v1/traces
        headers:

>           api-key: 1234

Reviewer 17: For the config properties with a certain format expected, such as headers, should give the percent encoded value as input? or Will configuration object take care of that detail?

Author: That's a great question. For the properties we have specific requirements about, the schema should validate for the expected types.

Reviewer 3: The [OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/protocol/exporter.md#specifying-headers-via-environment-variables) accepts plain text (presumably since it doesn't say anything about percent encoding) so I think the same should be true here.

```

Implementations *MUST* perform environment variable substitution before validating and parsing configuration file contents.

### Version guarantees & backwards compatibility

Each version of the configuration schema carries a major and minor version. Configurations specify the major and minor version they adhere to. Before reaching 1.0, each minor version change is equivalent to major version change. That is, there are no guarantees about compatibility and all changes are permitted. As of 1.0, we provide the following stability guarantees:

* For major version: No guarantees.
* For minor versions:
  * Property keys will not change. Although the addition of optional properties is permitted and the removal of properties is permitted, this *MUST* not be abused to rename property keys.
  * Property value types will not change, except that integers MAY become floating points.
  * No additional required properties.

Allowable changes:

* For major versions: All changes are permitted.
* For minor versions:
  * Addition of optional properties.
  * Required property keys may become optional.
  * Removal of properties, provided that the property key is not reused in the future.

> SDKs validating configuration *MUST* fail when they encounter a configuration with an unsupported version. Generally, this means fail when encountering a major version which is not recognized. An SDK might choose to maintain a library of validators / parsers for each major version, and use the configuration version to select and use the correct instance. Differences in minor versions (except pre-1.0 minor versions) SHOULD be acceptable, with the caveat that allowable property additions and removals MAY result in configuration that is different than excepted.

Reviewer 16: > Differences in minor versions (except pre-1.0 minor versions) SHOULD be acceptable, with the caveat that allowable property additions and removals MAY result in configuration that is different than excepted.

Should this be `MUST be acceptable`?  If I have a config with the same major version as a parser (but different minor/patch), those MUST work together by definition, as no breaking changes should have occurred.

Or is this saying that using a config that is newer than the parser will result in the parser dropping fields it doesn't know about?

Reviewer 3: > Or is this saying that using a config that is newer than the parser will result in the parser dropping fields it doesn't know about?

Yes, that was intent of the sentence.

Author: I agree that this *SHOULD* should be a *MUST* since parser and config versions of the same major version must work together.

The working group looked to the OpenTelemetry Collector and OpenTelemetry Operator for inspiration and guidance.

### Alternative schema languages

In choosing to recommend JSON schema, the working group looked at the following options:

* [Cue](https://cuelang.org/) - A promising simpler language to define a schema, the working group decided against CUE because:
  * Tooling available for validating CUE files in languages outside of Go were limited.
  * Familiarity and learning curve would create problems for both users and contributors of OpenTelemetry.
* [Protobuf](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers) - With protobuf already used heavily in OpenTelemetry, the format was worth investigating as an option to define the schema. The working group decided against Protobuf because:
  * Validation errors are the result of serlization errors which can be difficult to interpret.
  * Limitations in the schema definition language result in poor ergonomics if type safety is to be retained.

## Open questions

### How to handle environment variable / file config overlap?

How does file configuration interact with environment variable configuration when both are present?

> * Solution 1: Ignore environment configuration when file configuration is present. Log a warning to the user indicating that multiple configuration modes were detected, but use the file configuration as the source of truth.

Reviewer 16: +1 to the simpler solution here.  IMO we should encourage users to switch to using the config file over env vars over time after it is stable given the benefits outlined above.  Layering of config as described below would make it more difficult to reason about what my program is actually being run with.

Reviewer 3: Agreed. Given the proposed ability to use environment variable substitution in the config files, the need for environment variables should diminish over time.

Reviewer 15: Agree. 
Additionally, perhaps give them a helper config file that uses env var substitution in the right places so that they can migrate easily (and still get a warning until they get rid of env variables and move everything to the config file).

Author: I've moved this open question from this section to the "Environment variable substitution" https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/225/files#diff-bd4bde8aa8b94a5c3332731193eb54f01b2000c861620e7ec6263d382a4b5979R224 with the following text:

>When both configuration file and environment variables are present, the implementation *MUST* ignore environment variables in preference of the configuration file. The support for environment variable substitution in the configuration file gives users a mechanism for migrating away from environment variables in favour of configuration files.

* Solution 2: Superimpose environment configuration on top of file configuration when both are present. One problem with this is that environment variable configuration doesn’t map to file configuration in an intuitive way. For example, OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER defines a list of span exporters to be paired with a batch span processor configured by the OTEL_BSP_* variables. What do we do if the file config already contains one or more processors with an exporter specified in OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER? Essentially, do we merge or append the environment variable configuration?

### How to handle no-code vs programmatic configuration?

How should the SDK be configured when both no-code configuration (either environment variable or file config) and programmatic configuration are present? NOTE: this question exists today with only the environment variable interface available.

> * Solution 1: Make it clear that interpretation of the environment shouldn’t be built into components. Instead, SDKs should have a component that explicitly interprets the environment and returns a configured instance of the SDK. This is how the java SDK works today and it nicely separates concerns.

Reviewer 3: The API which is included allows users to implement these types of overrides / customizations, without getting bogged down with the details of exactly how overriding (i.e. merging configs) works or the exact set of use cases that are supported.

The `Parse(file) -> config` API parses a file and returns a config model. The `Configure(config)` accepts a config model and configures SDK components. 

The most typical use case would be to do something like `Configure(Parse(file))`, where the parsed model is passed directly to Configure. 

However, nothing is stopping users from doing all sorts customizations to the config model as needed in their environment. Example:
```
// Custom function to merge the second config model into the first
Config merge(Config first, Config second) { ... }

// Custom function to produce config model from environment variable scheme
Config getConfigFromEnv() { .. }

...

var config1 = Parse("/config1.yaml"); // Parse first config file
var config2 = Parse("/config2.yaml"); // Parse second config file
var configFromEnv = getConfigFromEnv(); // Get config from env

Configure(merge(config1, config2)); // Configure SDK with config2 taking priority over config1
Configure(merge(config2, config1)); // Configure SDK with config1 taking priority over config2
Configure(configFromEnv); // Configure SDK with configFromEnv
Configure(merge(config1, configFromEnv)); // Configure SDK with configFromEnv taking priority over config1
Configure(merge(configFromEnv, config1)); // Configure SDK with config1 taking priority over configFromEnv
Configure(merge(merge(configFromEnv, config1), config2)); // Configure SDK with config2 taking priority over config1 taking priority over configFromEnv
```

Let's leave the exact behavior of how to merge config models as unspecified. We can add it later if needed, but ideally, users would just define their own merge semantics since defining general rules that make everyone happy will be difficult.
